chore: Add RFC for health endpoint improvements (#10297)
vectordotdev/vector: rfcs/2021-12-01-9460-healthcheck-endpoint-improvements.md

# RFC 9460 - 2021-12-01 - Healthcheck endpoint improvements

Our existing health endpoint is too limited and additional features are required
to properly interact with load balancers or Kubernetes service discovery.

## Context

- [Additional response for api health endpoint](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/issues/9160)

## Scope

### In scope

- Update health endpoint to improve Vector's reliability in production deployments
- Update default configurations to improve Vector's out-of-the-box reliability

### Out of scope

- Moving the health endpoint out of our existing API
- Adding user facing configuration to adjust endpoint behavior or responses

## Pain

- Today's health endpoint causes 502's when running behind a loadbalancer
- The healthcheck isn't integrated with any components and only represents if Vector
itself is running

## Proposal

### User Experience

> The existing health endpoint on our GraphQL based API is enhanced to return 503's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing health endpoint on Vector's API is enhanced to return 503's
```

  - [Liveness and Readiness Probes](https://github.com/fluent/helm-charts/blob/355575c5b2a5bd858bcadeaa9d8d5d7f15a7816d/charts/fluent-bit/values.yaml#L132-L140)

## Alternatives

### Do nothing

Not adding additional responses to the existing health endpoint seems strictly
worse, as we don't have any ways to stop routing traffic to instances that are
shutting down. Those requests will already be rejected by sources and this
behaviour reflects poorly on zero downtime deployments, even though events
shouldn't be dropped.

### Aggregate per component health

We could instead look to define "healthiness" per component and aggregate/blend
these for the global health endpoint. Looking at a single Vector instance from
a high level this is similar to calculating a simple up/down metric for a
distributed system. We would need to determine how many errors/failures per
component cause them to be "unhealthy", and depending on the component and config
this could be very situational. This would require user provided configuration
and increase operational complexity, something we intentionally avoid when possible.

## Outstanding Questions

> - Should we assign a unique error code for "shutting down"?

Reviewer: This seems like something a GraphQL-based health endpoint could support. As noted in my [other comment](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/10297#discussion_r766173780) the `/health` endpoint is outside of the GraphQL API. A GraphQL health request might look like a request to `/graphql` with:

```graphql
query Health {
  status
}
```

- Do we want to return "unhealthy" if some number of components are "unhealthy"
  - Depending on deployment and configuration this could push durability concerns
to an agent layer, which wouldn't necessarily be ideal

>   - This could be introduced down the line as a configurable option

Reviewer: This seems related to the alternative you identified above. I would say we can defer this for now.

- Related to the previous, should sinks (or other components) regularly rerun

> their configured healthchecks or should it continue to be at startup only

Reviewer: This seems like a separate concern unless we wire up that concept of health to `/health`.

Author: Agreed, I feel like this is worth doing regardless - but isn't directly related here otherwise.

- Using `vector validate` as a Kubernetes Readiness Probe could take an instance
out of service discovery and push buffering and durability to a less optimal layer
  - This is probably a better startup check but may not be ideal for a regular

> runtime check, if that's the case we should use a Startup Probe

Reviewer: Looking at https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/ for startup probes, I don't think `vector validate` is a good fit since it exiting 0 doesn't actually indicate that Vector is started. It seems like the startup probe should just be the same check as the readiness probe.

Author: I was more thinking we'd exit if the sinks/sources weren't available - but that's a good point. Perhaps a reason for `vector health` 🤷

# RFC 9460 - 2021-12-01 - Healthcheck endpoint improvements

Our existing health endpoint is too limited and additional features are required
to properly interact with load balancers or Kubernetes service discovery.

## Context

- [Additional response for api health endpoint](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/issues/9160)

## Scope

### In scope

- Update health endpoint to improve Vector's reliability in production deployments
- Update default configurations to improve Vector's out-of-the-box reliability

### Out of scope

> - Moving the health endpoint out of our existing API

Reviewer 2: I'd go further than deeming this out out of scope, and suggest this should necessarily remain coupled for valid technical reasons.

As I [mentioned here](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/10297#discussion_r769391071), this was bundled with API code originally because both share a common Warp HTTP server. If we were to move it out of API, that would suggest we'd either need _two_ HTTP servers (complicating the port setup) - or, some other HTTP abstraction that would allow modules such as API and health to separately register routes. I think the latter would be an unnecessary complication.

Author: 👍 I talked some with @jszwedko last night about conditionally attaching the graphql handler so we could always expose the health endpoint but not the graphql paths, which some users have expressed concerns over having enabled for security reasons.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, `api = false` & `health = true` would be useful.

I still think the coupling makes sense. Like `playground = false`, it'd just be a case of turning on/off certain routes.

- Adding user facing configuration to adjust endpoint behavior or responses

## Pain

- Today's health endpoint causes 502's when running behind a loadbalancer
- The healthcheck isn't integrated with any components and only represents if Vector
itself is running

## Proposal

### User Experience

The existing health endpoint on Vector's API is enhanced to return 503's
when Vector is shutting down. This additional response will allow load balancers
and service discovery to better integrate with Vector, sources already begin
rejecting requests received during the shutdown process and updating the health
check will allow for removing the instance from available backends and avoid
routing traffic to an instance that will end up rejecting the request regardless.

### Implementation

We have existing logic in place for other components to handle Vector's shutdown.
The [health handler](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/blob/master/src/api/handler.rs#L7)

> can be updated to respond 503 if shutdown has started and 200 otherwise. This

Reviewer 2: Is there a cause to consider issuing a 503 during start-up, too?

Despite shutdown generally being the longer phase, there are situations were start-up can also be relatively expensive.

Third-party API key validation, using a `[provider]` block to retrieve a remote configuration, an eventual enterprise remote loading strategy, etc. These may be asynchronous concerns per-component, but they can add up to wall clock delays between a Vector process being started and it being ready to ingest events.

We could move HTTP initialization above config validation and issue a 503 until config is parsed, to get a more accurate readiness indicator.

Author: I'd think adjusting _when_ the warp server starts is better than having it start and return 503's until "Vector is ready" (which, IMHO isn't well defined/queryable today). We'd still be considered "down" for service discovery mechanisms and achieve the same goal.

Reviewer 2: Currently, warp starts _after_ a configuration has been loaded (and in some cases, retrieved), so if we don't want to distinguish between "Vector has started but is not yet ready to receive/ingest events" and "Vector is ready", that's already the current state.

However, if we don't care about that distinction during start-up, I'd wonder why we care during shutdown. Why not just take `/health` offline entirely to mirror the 'not reachable' state during start-up?

Author: That's essentially what the RFC proposes, no? Today during shutdown we're still reachable and still responding as "up".

I think the API can be valuable during shutdown for monitoring purposes and don't think I'd recommend shutting down the API prior to the rest of the components.

Reviewer 2: My main point is that I feel that "startup" and "shutdown" are somewhat equivalent.

They both describe a state in which the Vector _process_ is healthy (in the context of a running binary), but ingestion is inactive or winding down toward inactive.

If we are going to return 503 for one of them, it feels like we should return 503 for the other for completeness.

There _is_ a nuance between both states, which I guess could be an argument against it- during startup, a config could fail to be retrieved or parse, where shutdown _generally_ follows a health config that has been explicitly told to stop. I don't think that's always the case, though (a component can fail and therefore cause a shutdown.), so this still feels somewhat equivalent.

I'm not overly opinionated on this point. It just feels incomplete to accommodate shutdown but not startup.

should be a minor change and not negatively impact existing deployments.

## Rationale

This improvement is low effort but greatly improves the experience of running

> Vector behind a load balancer or in a service discovery system. As we reccomend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vector behind a load balancer or in a service discovery system. As we recommend
```

both of those options for production deployments there's very little reason not
to implement this.

## Drawbacks

> This is a minor change overall and does not add any real engineering burden.

Reviewer 2: This may be out of scope for the initial RFC, but it's worth noting there's still _some_ engineering work.

Potentially:

- Moving API init above config validation (if we want 503s on startup). This is a little more involved than shifting a few lines further up the page; config validation occurs within `Application::prepare_from_opts` and the API is separately spawned in `Application::run`, with a dependency on config already being available. This would need adjusting if we want to issue 503s pre-readiness.

- Additional signal handling to determine when Vector is starting up or shutting down. Even if this winds up just being shutdown, we need some way of updating the health state so that it responds with 503. Currently this is a idempotent/immutable route.

Author: Yeah, certainly some "hand waving" on difficulty and maintainability here. It's definitely less involved than per component "health" and calculating some health score out of that 😄

distributed system. We would need to determine how many errors/failures per
component cause them to be "unhealthy", and depending on the component and config
this could be very situational. This would require user provided configuration
and increase operational complexity, something we intentionally avoid when possible.

## Outstanding Questions

- ~~Should we assign a unique error code for "shutting down"?~~
- Do we want to return "unhealthy" if some number of components are "unhealthy"
  - Depending on deployment and configuration this could push durability concerns
to an agent layer, which wouldn't necessarily be ideal
  - This could be introduced down the line as a configurable option
- Related to the previous, should sinks (or other components) regularly rerun
their configured healthchecks or should it continue to be at startup only
- Using `vector validate` as a Kubernetes Readiness Probe could take an instance
out of service discovery and push buffering and durability to a less optimal layer
  - This is probably a better startup check but may not be ideal for a regular
runtime check, if that's the case we should use a Startup Probe

## Plan Of Attack

> - [ ] Integrate health endpoint with our shutdown sequence, letting the API return

Reviewer 2: It might be worth noting whether the GraphQL API is explicitly in/out of scope, such that this only concerns `/health` for now or whether it also includes `{ health }` (with appropriate types).

Ideally, we wind up with a state where it's simple to integrate with both without requiring separate signal mechanisms.

Author: I'd advocate removing the graphql endpoint as much as possible here due to the general concerns I've seen from users looking to run Vector "securely" and keeping the "basic" health endpoint as _dumb_ as possible. Is there a reason why we have both `/health` and `{ health }` today?

Reviewer 2: > Is there a reason why we have both /health and { health } today?

Mostly for the [reasons mentioned here](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/10297#discussion_r769391071).

Reviewer: I'm a fan of having both. The GraphQL endpoint could support, for example, `vector top` reporting Vector health status.
